https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0qaS5JyU77E&t=393s

Real Talk with Startup Chief Data Scientist (10 years of experience)
00:00 So when I think of like good data scientist versus great data scientist. Like a good data scientist indexes to value, understands what the business is trying to do and can deliver outcomes. Like a great Day to scientist…
00:20 Hey I’m Molly from springboard and I’m here with Ian Blumenfeld, a chief data scientist at Clover Health. Hi Ian thank you so much for joining us today.
00:27 Hi. Thank you for having me. I am really excited to be here.
00:29 Let’s start out with your LinkedIn profile. You said you do a data science with the product bent. What does that mean for you?
00:34 That means I tend to focus more on the use cases and applications versus the methods and the methodologies. It basically means if I am going to do something, I will start with why might this be valuable, why might this be useful versus is this possible and how will I do this.
00:57 You’ve been doing data science for 10 years now. How has the role changed over the years?
01:01 The biggest difference has really been that you need to be able to, if not write production code, at least interact with production software systems now. The years ago, if you could write to SQL reports and send it off to someone to make a decision. It was good enough. Now it’s kind of hard to make a high-level impact if you can write code that you know 10,000 or more people are going to interact with through some kind of software product.
01:37 Let’s talk a little bit about your own start up. Do you want to give us a little bit of background knowledge?
01:41 Coming out of my first job, I just sort of had an itch of like I want to do something for myself. It was a healthcare data machine learning based start-up. It was a complete and total failure.
01:56 What were some of your biggest learning?
01:58 I mean the big meta learning is essentially like the market has to want something for you to do it. Just because you are a smart person, does not mean you are going to build something that anybody wants. Having that experience of launching a failed product helped me get a lot more critical about my own work and also the decisions that I was making going forward in terms of like what I should be working on and who I should be working with. And so I ended up developing through that owner/investor mindset, so when I went to look for a job after that, part of what I was accessing was essentially like alright if I go work for this company, I’m basically, I am making a large investment in them right? Even though other people are putting up the capital, I am putting up my time. And so is this a thing that I have a reason to believe could be successful? Is it well-setup? Is the environment ready for it? I look at my current job and say like alright, what should I be spending my time on. It’s through that same lens.
03:14 So now present day, you are a chief data scientist at Clover. What are you doing there and what problems are you solving?
03:21 Clover is still a startup. We are on the larger side of the startup at this point. I do a lot of work on our machine learning platform. Kind of looking at what kind of models we can produce to do a good job of really identifying health risk so that our clinical team know where they should be focusing their resources. And I also spend a fair amount of my time, kind of thinking, thinking through how we can address the problem of like what next. Anyone who works for commercial operations basically knows that this point machine learning and the predictive modeling part is a relatively small slice of the problem. 
04:05 And once you get the models that starts to perform, the next question you are going to get is okay now what do I do. Um so I am essentially going to spend more and more of my time like working through that part of the problem, which is half understanding what are these models actually do and then half kind of like understanding from our operation perspectives. What are their capabilities and how do we figure out how to match those things together.
04:36 How has your role progressed through your data science career?
04:31 When I first started, I was writing a lot more code than I do now. Part of that is tools like the tools that have gotten way better over the last ten years which means I have to write less codes to solve the same kind of problems, but part of it is there are more people that sit around me that can help. So that means that like I have to spend some amount of time figuring out like who should be doing what. And like how do I pop off parts you know parts of these problems that are really appropriate for people different stages in their career development I do a lot more mentoring than I did and I spend much more of my time thinking through actually solve them versus like actually how to solve that. This is when the breath becomes useful because then you can say something like okay we need to solve this problem like here’s kind of like classes of types of methods that might be appropriate. Here is a few papers or blog posts that go into them so I can send someone on their way. I used to do all the stuff myself. I don’t do that all of it anymore.
06:02 A lot more delegation now. 
06:04 I think of it like a last delegation and more like giving other people the opportunity to step up because you know if I keep all the interesting part of the problem to myself like hey great for me but someone else is losing the chance to like try to do something interesting and valuable and useful.
06:29 You spoke about how your current role is more about mentoring. What does mentorship mean to you?
06:34 It is really about helping folks build a framework within their own careers for how they should be making decisions so he can own what their career path and what their career progression is. I think there is a tendency, especially in large companies, for people to come in and say okay the rubrics look like this. I am a level four and I would like to be a level five but you as an individual also needs to have a view of where you’d like to go. And there are places that are going to be aligned with those rubrics and places where it’s going to diverge and where it diverges is kind of like your opportunities to take risk and try to do something but if you don’t have a good framework for sort of understanding how do I make those kinds of decisions. It can become very hard and you just end up playing the video game. Like oh, now I am a level five, now I am a level six and then you look back after 10 years and you say is this the career I actually wanted? You are lucky if the answer is yes.
07:43 Outside of foresight and a bit of risk-taking, what do you think takes to be a good mentee?
07:48 Curiosity. Humility. There’s just a lot of stuff that you don’t know and a willingness to try things. The people that I’ve mentored that I think have gotten the most value out of it are the ones who said basically OK I want this mentorship because I think I should be doing something different then I am doing. And are they actually willing to go out and do that different thing? If you are not willing to do something different than you are currently doing, it is very hard to get something out of mentorship from anyone, no matter how good that mentor actually is. 
08:29 What are the two things that sets apart a great data scientist from just a good data scientist? 
08:35 So when I think of like good data scientist versus great data scientist. Like a good data scientist indexes to value, understand what the business is trying to do and can deliver outcomes. 
08:48 Like a great data scientist, like has creativity, and judgement like wrapped up in that package so that means that number one not only do they understand what the business is trying to do, they can also can map that on to the relative priority of like what should they be working on. So they are able to identify like alright, out of these ten possibilities, these two problems are by far the most important ones and that’s where they are going to spend their time and you know the other eight don’t even think about it again. And they can also like look at a set of methods or a set of proscribed solutions to those kind of problems and basically know OK like this is solved and I’m going to copy here and listen to the expert here. Like in this area, this doesn’t look right to me. And they can take down the reasons from the first principle and figure out like where do I need to be contrarian versus like do all the things that the papers say that I should do. A great data scientist exits the rubrics. 
10:02 Alright. Now is the time we’ve all been waiting for. We are going to have some lightening talk questions. So first, where is a good place to go to get a clean dataset online?
10:12 For me, I don’t believe in clean data. If you are going to do a project, go find the dirties data you can find and go like go use that. 
10:22 Perfect. Dirty data. Okay. SQL, Python or R, if you can only have one?
10:27 Python.
10:28 If you were not a data scientist, what would you be Ian?
10:31 I would be a policy economist. 
10:34 So if you can go back in time and tell your young data scientist self something. What would you go back and say?
10:40 Don’t worry about your job title. Worry about the company that you work for. 
10:45 Yeah. I’d love to open it up if you have anything to add? 
10:48 for the past six months or so I’ve been doing we call it a podcast data science adjacent podcast that kind of goes through the softer side of data science so like beyond the technical skills like how you reason through problems Al those sorts of things. It’s called small differences. You can find us on Spotify, on iTunes and on Twitter at ofdifferences. 
11:16 Well Ian, thank you so much for joining us today. We really appreciate it. 
11:19 Thank you for having me.